[The creation of the SID chip — The SID Homepage (sidmusic.org, Andreas Varga), http://www.sidmusic.org/sid/sidcreate.html — fetched 2026-08-30; page text extracted from HTML; images not included]

THE CREATION OF THE SID-CHIP

This time we'll discuss the SID - the remarkable soundchip that

gives the C64 that fantastic sound.

When "Project C64" was first discussed at Commodore in Jan 1981,

the intention was to create a game computer. Those plans were

changed during the project and instead Commodore decided to build

a true home computer.

A good game computer must be able to generate good sound. And the

soundchip in the C64 can handle 3 voices at the same time spanning

an unusually wide range of frequencies.

The work on the C64 was to be carried out by two groups. One to

develop the graphics chip and one for the SID. (SID is short for

Sound Interface Device).

The work on the SID was begun in spring 1981 by Robert Yannes, a

young engineer who had been responsible for the design behind

the VIC-20. His team consisted of himself, two technicians and a

CAD-operator.

> - I had worked with synthesizers and I wanted a chip like
those
>
in a synthesizer, Robert Yannes stated.

According to Yannes noone in the project team knew how to carry

out the project.

> - Apart from the basic research, that I'd been doing since
higschool,
>
the actual development of the SID took just 4-5 months.

Yannes high expectations on the SID was the reason why the chip

got unusually high quality compared to those found in videogames.

The SID has a more precise frequency control and the independent

envelope-generator creates a more intense timbre.

The envelope-function enables the SID to imitate an instrument

more correct than other chips. Envelope is a tool for controlling

the volume-level on a voice without using the very volume-control.

Yannes originally incorporated a table in the SID, enabling it to

interpret musical tones into frequency-datas. This feature was

later removed, since it was too expensive.

The real capacity of the SID-chip is not fully known even today -

not even by its constructors! The reason for this is that the

the technical specification written while the chip was developed

accidently got incorrect.

An example of this is that the documentation states that the chip

can perform an logical AND on different waveforms.

Another error is in the filter-function.

> - The filter was the last feature we added in, and there
was no
>
time to make it perfect, Yannes tells us. Computer simulations
>
told us the filter wouldn't work out very well. And it didn't.
>
I had no chance to correct the errors.

These errors in the documentation has many programmers unable to

use all possibilities of the chip.

Christer Rindeblad
